spec.md, before:

# Logux Protocol

Logux protocol is used to synchronize actions between [Logux logs].

This protocol is based on simple JS types: boolean, number, string, array
and key-value object.

You can use any encoding and any low-level protocol: JSON encoding
over WebSockets, XML over AJAX and HTTP “keep-alive”.
Low-level protocol must guarantee messages order and content.
Main way is JSON over WebSocket Secure.

[Logux logs]: https://github.com/logux/logux-core

## Messages

Communication is based on messages. Every message is a array with string
in the beginning and any types next:

```ts
[
  string type,
  …
]
```

First string in message array is a message type. Possible types:

* [`error`]
* [`connect`]
* [`connected`]
* [`ping`]
* [`pong`]
* [`sync`]
* [`synced`]
* [`debug`]

If client received unknown type, it should send `wrong-format` error
and continue communication.

Protocol design has no client and server roles. But in most real cases
client will send `connect` and `ping`. Server will send `connected` and `pong`.
Both will send `error`, `sync` and `synced`.

[`connected`]: #connected
[`connect`]:   #connect
[`synced`]:    #synced
[`error`]:     #error
[`ping`]:      #ping
[`pong`]:      #pong
[`sync`]:      #sync
[`debug`]:     #debug

## `error`

Error message contains error description and error type.

```ts
[
  "error",
  string errorType,
  (any options)?
]
```

Right now there are 7 possible errors:

- `wrong-protocol`: client Logux protocol version is not supported by server.
  Error options object will contain `supported` key with minimum supported
  version and `used` with used version.
* `wrong-format`: message is not correct JSON, is not a array or have no `type`.
  Error options will contain bad message string.
* `unknown-message`: message’s type is not supported. Error options will contain
  bad message type.
- `wrong-credentials`: sent credentials doesn’t pass authentication.
* `missed-auth`: not `connect`, `connected` or `error` messages was sent
  before authentication. Error options will contain bad message string.
* `timeout`: a timeout was reached. Errors options will contain timeout duration
  in milliseconds.
* `wrong-subprotocol`: client application subprotocol version is not supported
  by server. Error options object will contain `supported` key with requirements
  and `used` with used version.

## `connect`

After connection was started some client should send `connect` message to other.

```ts
[
  "connect",
  number protocol,
  string nodeId,
  number synced,
  (object options)?
]
```

Receiver should check protocol version in second position in message array.
If version is lower, than minimum supported version,
it should send `wrong-protocol` error and close connection.

Third position contains unique node name. Same node name is used in default
log timer, so sender must be sure that name is unique.
Client should use UUID if it can’t guarantee name uniqueness with other way.

Fourth position contains last `added` time used by receiver
in previous connection (`0` on first connection).
message with all new actions since `synced` (all actions on first connection).

Fifth position is optional and contains extra client option in object.
Right now protocol supports only `subprotocol` and `credentials` keys there.

Subprotocol version is a string in [SemVer] format. It describes a application
subprotocol, which developer will create on top of Logux protocol.
If other node doesn’t support this subprotocol version,
it could send `wrong-subprotocol` error.

Credentials could be in any type. Receiver may check credentials data.
On wrong credentials data receiver may send `wrong-credentials` error
and close connection.

In most cases client will initiate connection, so client will send `connect`.

[SemVer]: http://semver.org/

## `connected`

This message is answer to received [`connect`] message.

```ts
[
  "connected",
  number protocol,
  string nodeId,
  [number start, number end],
  (object options)?
]
```

`protocol`, `nodeId` and `options` are same with [`connect`] message.

Fourth position contains [`connect`] receiving time and `connected` sending
time. Time should be a milliseconds elapsed since 1 January 1970 00:00:00 UTC.
Receiver may use this information to calculate difference between sender
and receiver time. It could prevents problems if somebody has wrong time
or wrong time zone. Calculated time fix may be used to correct
action’s `time` in [`sync`] messages.

Right after this message receiver should send [`sync`] message with all
new actions since last connection (all actions on first connection).

In most cases client will initiate connection, so server will answer `connected`.

## `ping`

Client could send `ping` message to check connection.

```ts
[
  "ping",
  number synced
]
```

Message array contains also sender last `added`. So receiver could update it
to use in next [`connect`] message.

Receiver should send [`pong`] message as soon as possible.

In most cases client will send `ping`.

## `pong`

`pong` message is a answer to [`ping`] message.

```ts
[
  "pong",
  number synced
]
```

Message array contains sender last `added` too.

In most cases server will send `pong`.

## `sync`

This message contains new actions for synchronization.

```ts
[
  "sync",
  number synced
  (object action, object meta)+
]
```

Second position contain biggest `added` time from actions in message.
Receiver should send it back in [`synced`] message.

This message array length is dynamic. For each action sender should add
2 position: for action object and action’s metadata.

Action object could contains any key and values, but it must contains at least
`type` key with string value.

Action metadata contains `time` with action creation time
and `id`:

```ts
[number milliseconds, string nodeId, number orderInMs]
```

Every action should have unique `id`. If receiver’s log already contains action
with same `id`, receiver must silently ignore new action from `sync`.

Received action’s `time` time may be different with sender’s `time`,
because sender could correct action’s time based on data from [`connected`]
message. This correction could fix problems when some client have wrong
time or time zone.

[Logux Core docs]: https://github.com/logux/logux-core#created-time

## `synced`

`synced` message is a answer to [`sync`] message.

```ts
[
  "synced",
  number synced
]
```

Receiver should mark all actions with lower `added` time as synchronized.

## `debug`

`debug` message contains debug information for developer.

```ts
[
  "debug",
  string type,
  any data
]
```

Right now there is only one type:

* `error`: node catch a error. Debug data will contain error stack trace.

Commit message:

Compress action IDs in sync message

spec.md, after:

# Logux Protocol

Logux protocol is used to synchronize actions between [Logux logs].

This protocol is based on simple JS types: boolean, number, string, array
and key-value object.

You can use any encoding and any low-level protocol: JSON encoding
over WebSockets, XML over AJAX and HTTP “keep-alive”.
Low-level protocol must guarantee messages order and content.
Main way is JSON over WebSocket Secure.

[Logux logs]: https://github.com/logux/logux-core

## Messages

Communication is based on messages. Every message is a array with string
in the beginning and any types next:

```ts
[
  string type,
  …
]
```

First string in message array is a message type. Possible types:

* [`error`]
* [`connect`]
* [`connected`]
* [`ping`]
* [`pong`]
* [`sync`]
* [`synced`]
* [`debug`]

If client received unknown type, it should send `wrong-format` error
and continue communication.

Protocol design has no client and server roles. But in most real cases
client will send `connect` and `ping`. Server will send `connected` and `pong`.
Both will send `error`, `sync` and `synced`.

[`connected`]: #connected
[`connect`]:   #connect
[`synced`]:    #synced
[`error`]:     #error
[`ping`]:      #ping
[`pong`]:      #pong
[`sync`]:      #sync
[`debug`]:     #debug

## `error`

Error message contains error description and error type.

```ts
[
  "error",
  string errorType,
  (any options)?
]
```

Right now there are 7 possible errors:

- `wrong-protocol`: client Logux protocol version is not supported by server.
  Error options object will contain `supported` key with minimum supported
  version and `used` with used version.
* `wrong-format`: message is not correct JSON, is not a array or have no `type`.
  Error options will contain bad message string.
* `unknown-message`: message’s type is not supported. Error options will contain
  bad message type.
- `wrong-credentials`: sent credentials doesn’t pass authentication.
* `missed-auth`: not `connect`, `connected` or `error` messages was sent
  before authentication. Error options will contain bad message string.
* `timeout`: a timeout was reached. Errors options will contain timeout duration
  in milliseconds.
* `wrong-subprotocol`: client application subprotocol version is not supported
  by server. Error options object will contain `supported` key with requirements
  and `used` with used version.

## `connect`

After connection was started some client should send `connect` message to other.

```ts
[
  "connect",
  number protocol,
  string nodeId,
  number synced,
  (object options)?
]
```

Receiver should check protocol version in second position in message array.
If version is lower, than minimum supported version,
it should send `wrong-protocol` error and close connection.

Third position contains unique node name. Same node name is used in default
log timer, so sender must be sure that name is unique.
Client should use UUID if it can’t guarantee name uniqueness with other way.

Fourth position contains last `added` time used by receiver
in previous connection (`0` on first connection).
message with all new actions since `synced` (all actions on first connection).

Fifth position is optional and contains extra client option in object.
Right now protocol supports only `subprotocol` and `credentials` keys there.

Subprotocol version is a string in [SemVer] format. It describes a application
subprotocol, which developer will create on top of Logux protocol.
If other node doesn’t support this subprotocol version,
it could send `wrong-subprotocol` error.

Credentials could be in any type. Receiver may check credentials data.
On wrong credentials data receiver may send `wrong-credentials` error
and close connection.

In most cases client will initiate connection, so client will send `connect`.

[SemVer]: http://semver.org/

## `connected`

This message is answer to received [`connect`] message.

```ts
[
  "connected",
  number protocol,
  string nodeId,
  [number start, number end],
  (object options)?
]
```

`protocol`, `nodeId` and `options` are same with [`connect`] message.

Fourth position contains [`connect`] receiving time and `connected` sending
time. Time should be a milliseconds elapsed since 1 January 1970 00:00:00 UTC.
Receiver may use this information to calculate difference between sender
and receiver time. It could prevents problems if somebody has wrong time
or wrong time zone. Calculated time fix may be used to correct
action’s `time` in [`sync`] messages.

Right after this message receiver should send [`sync`] message with all
new actions since last connection (all actions on first connection).

In most cases client will initiate connection, so server will answer `connected`.

## `ping`

Client could send `ping` message to check connection.

```ts
[
  "ping",
  number synced
]
```

Message array contains also sender last `added`. So receiver could update it
to use in next [`connect`] message.

Receiver should send [`pong`] message as soon as possible.

In most cases client will send `ping`.

## `pong`

`pong` message is a answer to [`ping`] message.

```ts
[
  "pong",
  number synced
]
```

Message array contains sender last `added` too.

In most cases server will send `pong`.

## `sync`

This message contains new actions for synchronization.

```ts
[
  "sync",
  number synced
  (object action, object meta)+
]
```

Second position contain biggest `added` time from actions in message.
Receiver should send it back in [`synced`] message.

This message array length is dynamic. For each action sender should add
2 position: for action object and action’s metadata.

Action object could contains any key and values, but it must contains at least
`type` key with string value.

Action metadata contains at least `id` and `time`.
`time` is action’s creation time. It is a milliseconds from second time
in `connected` message.

`id` could be in 3 forms:

```ts
[number shift, string nodeId, number orderInMs]
[number shift, string orderInMs]
number shift
```

`shift` is a milliseconds from second time in `connected` message.
If `nodeId` is equal to sender node ID, it could be missed.
`[shift, 0]` could be compressed to just `shift`.

Every action should have unique `id`. If receiver’s log already contains action
with same `id`, receiver must silently ignore new action from `sync`.

Received action’s `time` time may be different with sender’s `time`,
because sender could correct action’s time based on data from [`connected`]
message. This correction could fix problems when some client have wrong
time or time zone.

[Logux Core docs]: https://github.com/logux/logux-core#created-time

## `synced`

`synced` message is a answer to [`sync`] message.

```ts
[
  "synced",
  number synced
]
```

Receiver should mark all actions with lower `added` time as synchronized.

## `debug`

`debug` message contains debug information for developer.

```ts
[
  "debug",
  string type,
  any data
]
```

Right now there is only one type:

* `error`: node catch a error. Debug data will contain error stack trace.
